INSTALL

As yet, this code has only been tested on linux. It's been written with
 portability in mind, but may still need some tweaks, especially with the
 includes, for other unixes.

Just running 'make' and then 'make install' (as root) should get you a working
 binary. The latter does not actually copy the binary anywhere, but it needs to
 be run as root since this is a setuid root application. This is needed because
 only root can open the raw socket needed to send and recieve ICMP pings. Also
 see SECURITY.

GENERAL

This application monitors a set of internet hosts for latency problems and
 downtime. It does this by probing them periodically using ICMP echo messages
 (aka ping), expecting an echo_reply message in return within a reasonable
 timeframe. I've chosen for a visual commandline interface, to facilitate a
 single-glance overview of the status of the monitored hosts, while still
 allowing the application to be used over an ssh link easily. When doing
 the latter, it would be suggested to run the program under screen. While
 the application doesn't terminate on a SIGHUP, its visual output cannot
 be recovered otherwise.

In the lower pane of the screen, each individual probe result is shown,
 colour-coded to indicate the meaning of that result for that particular host.
 Green indicates a ping reply within a reasonable margin of the host's fastest
 response-time. Yellow indicates minor jitter in the host's latency, as can be
 expected due to normal usage of the uplink or internal buffers. Blue indicates
 more serious delays, going over twice the minimum latency found for the host.
 Lastly, red indicates that the host did not reply to the echo request within
 the timeout period. This timeout is a function of the ping interval (by
 default 60 seconds) divided by the number of hosts being monitored, see
 CONFIGURATION for more information.

In the upper pane, each symbol (by default '+') indicates one probe. They are
 coloured in the same way the lines in the lower pane of the screen. Each host
 has its own column, as indicated by the associated characters in the header
 line. Series of non-green symbols vertically may indicate issues with the host
 corresponding to that column, while consistent non-green horizontal lines may
 indicate issues more local to the machine running the program.

The 'Network tree' window (toggled on by default) gives a quick overview of the
 status of the monitored hosts. The colours of the associated characters will
 updated after two consecutive non-green results. The network structure can be
 shown here and shortnames can be added by specially preparing the targets
 configuration file, see CONFIGURATION.

The 'Hosts down' window (will appear when there are hosts in the list) shows
 the hosts that have failed to reply to two or more consecutive probes, until
 they respond once again.

While running the program, pressing the character associated with one of the
 monitored hosts will show a window with detailed information about that host.
 Pressing that character again will toggle it off again. Furthermore, <space>
 toggles the network tree view and <enter> toggles the list of unreachable
 hosts. If not toggled on or off explicitly, the latter will be visible only
 when there are hosts in the list of unreachable hosts.

In recognition of the desire to keep a log of probe data longer than the
 terminal backscroll, an HTML output facility has been added. Simply supply
 the program with a filename as its first (and only) commandline argument
 to have it output there. This file will be created or truncated at startup,
 after root privileges have been dropped.

CONFIGURATION

The hosts to be monitored are specified in a textfile (by default ./targets in
 the CWD). One hostname or IP address can be specified per line, followed by an
 optional shortname for the host. Indentation by using spaces and paragraphs
 using empty lines can be used to indicate the connection structure between the
 hosts, as well as identify groups of hosts. Each host will be visually linked
 to the most previous, lesser indented host in the configuration file. The
 shortnames (if configured) will be printed in this visual representation of
 the network tree. A special case is made for the following characters, to draw
 a box around the name of a group of hosts, like this:

  '-----------`
  | Groupname |
  \-----------/

 Clearly, doing this requires a contiguous group of at least 3 host
 specifications.

At the top of the main.c source-file are some defines that you'd also might
 want to tweak, but take care while doing so. Please note that the actual
 timeout to determine whether a host is unreachable or not is a function of
 the INTERVAL set there divided by the number of hosts you're monitoring.
 Assuming normal landline connections, if you haven't had a reply in two
 seconds, you'll probably never get one, so monitoring 30 hosts with the
 standard 60 second interval should be fine. I recommend increasing that
 interval if you'll be monitoring more.

SECURITY

This program is installed setuid root, due to the need for a raw socket to
 send/recieve ICMP messages. If you look at the source-code, you can see that
 the socket is opened and root privileges are dropped (assuming the program is
 started as a non-privileged user) straight away, before handling any user- or
 file input. This is reasonably secure, as long as you can ensure the integrity
 of the source-code before compilation, and is very very unlikely to assist in
 any type of root compromise. More feasible would be to abuse bugs elsewhere in
 the program to send and recieve arbitraty ICMP messages, which would enable
 various types of DoS attacks. As such it would be wise to restrict use of this
 application to trusted groups of users.

EXAMPLE CONFIGURATION

Using the 10.* ranges where you'd normally find public IP ranges to protect
 the innocent, should someone decide to copy-paste this configuration and leave
 it at that. Please make sure you have permission to ping the hosts you are
 including in your configuration.

Example 1: single-homed site with a residential router

192.168.0.4 local host external interface
 192.168.0.3 other host 1
 192.168.0.2 other host 2
 192.168.0.1 home router internal interface
  10.0.1.58 home router external interface
   10.0.1.255 isp inward-facing gateway
    10.0.2.1 isp dhcp server
    10.0.2.2 isp nameserver 1
    10.0.2.3 isp nameserver 2

   10.0.3.1 isp noc gateway
   10.0.3.2 isp mail server
   10.0.3.3 isp news server
   10.0.3.4 isp proxy server
   10.0.3.5 isp outward-facing gateway

    10.1.0.1 control site 1
    10.2.0.1 control site 2
    10.3.0.1 control site 3 gateway
     10.3.1.1 control site 3
    10.4.0.1 control site 4

 In this example, the horizontal indentation is used to more-or-less indicate
 the hops required to get the to various hosts, while the vertical whitespace
 (empty lines) separate logical groups. The first logical group here comprises
 the network elements required to give you basic connectivity. The second group
 providing some standard ISP services. The last group is comprised of some
 selected hosts on other networks, which can give you an idea of your global
 connectivity.
 Keep in mind the internal network structure of your uplink may be very
 different. Use traceroute or request a network map from your provider to be
 sure about your local network topology. Also note that not all hosts are
 configured to reply to ping requests from all other hosts.
 It is recommended to use more abbreviations in the supplied shortnames, as to
 keep the width of the network tree window limited.

Example 2: multi-homed server in a professional NOC

10.0.1.48 server external interface
 10.0.1.255 isp inward-facing router
  10.0.2.1 isp core router 1
  10.0.2.2 isp core router 2
   10.0.3.1 isp peering router
    10.1.0.1 peer 1 outward-facing router
    10.2.0.1 peer 2 outward-facing router
   10.0.3.2 isp transit router
    10.3.0.1 transit provider 1 router
    10.4.0.1 transit provider 2 router
